welcome back again everyone la Isla
Montgomery here with part 6 in our
special 10-year anniversary programa
especial covering the visit to China in
1972 of Richard M Nixon and the historic
meetings he had with matzoh dong and
Joanne Lai we left off last time with Jo
and Kissinger putting on their miners
hat and digging deep into the minutiae
of the wording of the final communique
that would be signed in February 1972 at
the conclusion of the u.s. presidential
visit on the final day of Kissinger
October trip the two sides were still
performing microsurgery on the matter of
the joint communique during the past
several days since Kissinger had arrived
the US and Chinese side had enjoyed
little in the way of sleep both
Kissinger Jo and their respective aides
had pulled one all-nighter after another
still at an impasse
Kissinger again tried to explain the
u.s. position quote we have attempted
mr. prime minister to draft a communique
that takes into account the necessities
of both sides I believe that it would be
a very unusual communique if we could
agree to it it would be more honest and
more honorable than any other communique
that I have seen in the relations
between two countries it states our
differences without being offensive and
it tries to state a position direction
and it tries to state a positive
direction without raising false hopes
and therefore it could begin a new
historical period not only in the
relations of our peoples but the peoples
of the world end quote
on this final day of negotiations both
sides retired to their corners to hash
out what had been agreed to so far in
the morning session time was running out
and this joint communique needed to be
finalized it contained the essence of
the new relationship and both sides had
an obvious vested interest in having it
worked out to the satisfaction of their
respective peoples the face the Mensa
of China and the US was also at stake
you know the context of all this past
history and bad memories that existed
between the u.s. and the PRC and all
that bad blood from two wars that it was
all coming down to the wire you know I
guess it was only natural that it was
taking longer than expected to finalize
they had evening for almost two hours
starting at 10 minutes to 10:00
Joe Enlai and his team assembled these
were the same ones Joe had relied on
throughout the talks with Kissinger
going back to the July secret trip
acting Foreign Minister Jeep off a
director of the Western European and
American Department jonghwan chin Joe
and life secretary jean-jacques way as
well as the trusted assistants and
interpreters one hi wrong and Nancy Tong
wen Chung and sitting next to Kissinger
throughout the entirety of his talks was
one of the unsung heroes of this chapter
in us-china history Winston Lord Winston
Lord one of America's diplomatic greats
had played a massive role in this whole
drama since first secret trip in July
now they all came together for what was
hoped would be the last time with
respect to agreeing on the final wording
of this joint communique that next year
when Nixon came would be signed by the
leaders of the US and China and serviced
a cornerstone for the future
relationship even this late in the game
Kissinger was still being stymied by the
wording of the communique that Joe and
his side were trying to push through he
did his best to try and reason with Joe
about the language being inserted
let me quote from the transcripts after
reading through the version handed to
him that evening
Kissinger told Joe straight-out quote
let me make a philosophical comment
before I make specific comments ever
since this administration has come into
office the President and I have
attempted to start a new direction
towards the People's Republic and this
is why for us the visit in China
marks in many
spec's the high point of what we have
attempted to do in our foreign policy
we started this when improving relations
with the People's Republic of China was
not at all a popular course now what
fills me with some melancholy is the
impression I have that for your own
reasons you are under necessity to state
our disagreements in the sharpest and
most provocative way possible all the
drafts we have submitted have attempted
to emphasize areas of agreement now I
understand the pressures and the
convictions that push you into an
opposite direction you did not go
through what you have done for 50 years
in order to alter your beliefs in
anticipation of a president's visit but
we have an important decision to make
and the decision is whether we are
starting a new period or engaging in a
tactic in a struggle I'm speaking with
great frankness we are trying to begin a
new era now for example to ask the
President of the United States to sign a
document with the first sentence of the
first substantive paragraph saying
people of the world want to make
revolution his rather strong medicine
similarly I have explained to the prime
minister previously that we did not
start the war in Vietnam that is this
administration to not start it and we
are trying to end it indeed we are
hoping it will perhaps be ended by the
time the president comes here but for
him to be asked to sign if the war
should go on the Chinese determination
to help to the end the struggle of
Vietnam Laos and Cambodia where American
soldiers are being killed is rather
painful we are not asking you not to
support them and the Prime Minister
knows that we have asked nothing with
respect to Vietnam and will take no
advantage in any respect in our
negotiations towards Vietnam but the
president will have to answer to the
American people so we are not trying to
affect your actions I'm speaking now of
your words I could give other examples
we are not challenging your views we are
just challenging your expression end
quote
well Henry Kissinger and the American
side had to leave whose time for some
soul-searching on both sides they
retired on
evening of the 25th and with the ball on
the 5-yard line they had to parse the
language down to the diplomatic bare
minimum that not only satisfied the two
leaders but the people of both countries
in the eyes of the world who were all
gonna take out their magnifying glasses
and analyze everything of what had
actually been agreed on Kissinger and
Joe agreed this communique when it was
announced had to have some meat in there
otherwise what was the point to get
Chairman Mao and President Nixon
involved
let me quote a short passage from dr.
Kissinger as he tries to explain to his
Chinese counterparts about the wording
of the part of the communicate
concerning Taiwan you'll get the main
idea of how excruciating this was quote
I want to explain to you what we
attempted to do to meet your full
suggestions but we wanted to do what we
could in the light of your discussion
yesterday we have taken the version that
general Haig brought to you and changed
the word abiding interest to position
where it says it reaffirms its abiding
interest we have said it reaffirms its
position and it added the phrase through
peaceful negotiations between the
parties directly concerned to make it
clear that we don't consider ourselves a
party to that negotiation and we have
substituted the word removal for
reduction the progressive removal rather
than the progressive reduction and we
have modified this phrase as tensions
decrease unquote it was a lot of this on
October 26 the day he was scheduled to
depart Kissinger delayed his flight for
another hour to try and take this to the
Gold Line as Kissinger's jet was getting
gassed up everyone pored over what both
sides really hoped would be the final
revisions the last-minute haggling
though much an agreement on substance
was not in lockstep with the final
wording finally they just ran out of
time they managed to move the ball a
couple of yards closer to the goal line
but in the end Kissinger had to tell Joe
that the final communique would have to
wait and that he would be sending the
very capable Alexander Hey
back in January as his special envoy
back to China and hopefully finished
this off then their plane took off
Kissinger and his team had a lot of work
to do before reporting the results of
the five days of discussions to the
president a lot was riding on this
second trip by Kissinger in July he had
gotten everything sliced and diced for
more detailed concluded discussions at a
later time and this later time was
supposed to be this October visit of
Kissinger despite what we know now that
neither side would ever learn to fully
like or trust the other they still had
to find a way to make this work they had
come this far and for the US and China
to make friends
despite the most pessimistic of
potential outcomes or Consequences was
certainly worth the risk
that's why Nixon wanted to do it and the
evening of October 20th 1971 at the
welcome banquet that Joe and Lai had put
together to welcome dr. Kissinger and
his team there first evening after
arriving he stood up to give a toast
it was extemporaneous no notes just an
old veteran of half a century of
diplomacy going through a routine he had
done a thousand times before in this
current dark hour and the relations
between the US and China let's take a
moment to remember Joe and lies words
they went like this quote dr. Kissinger
and friends I would like to take this
opportunity to welcome President Nixon's
special envoy dr. Kissinger and the
other American friends who have come to
China for this interim visit the purpose
of dr. Kissinger's present visit is to
make preparations related to the
political discussions and technical
arrangements of President Nixon's visit
a new chapter will now be opened in the
history of the relations between China
and the United States after they have
been cut for 22 years and we should say
that the credit for this should go to
Chairman Mao Zedong and President Nixon
of course there must be someone serving
as a guide and it was dr. Kissinger
who courageously made a secret visit to
China the so called land of mystery that
was quite a remarkable thing this is now
dr. Kissinger second visit to a land
that should no longer be considered a
mystery
he has come as a friend and has also
brought with him some new friends as for
me although I have never been to the
United States I know quite a few
American friends and the United States
is not unfamiliar to me it is evident
that the social systems of our two
countries are different and our
respective world outlooks well dr.
Kissinger likes to use the word
philosophy are totally different
yet this should not prevent us from
finding common ground the sino-american
talks have gone on for 16 years now but
no common ground has yet been found now
President Nixon will personally come to
Beijing for discussions and dr.
Kissinger is his advance man and we hope
these discussions will achieve positive
results our two peoples are great
peoples although our two countries are
separated by the vast Pacific Ocean
friendship links our two peoples
together after receiving the US table
tennis team this year we received a
number of other American friends and we
hope that this new era will be
approached in a new spirit I propose a
toast to the friendship between the
great American people and the great
Chinese people and to the health of dr.
Kissinger and to all other friends end
quote
just before dr. Kissinger's plane took
off he said some final words to Joe and
Lai he took out a small gift that New
York Governor Nelson Rockefeller had
given him he handed it to Joe and ly and
said quote now I have only one other
personal thing to say to you mr. prime
minister a friend of mine who was a
collector of Chinese art before I left
sent me something which he wanted me as
a token of the pleasure Chinese art has
given him to bring back something from
America to China it is something in the
form of a lotus flower which he tells me
means peace and serenity and traditional
China and so I have taken the liberty of
bringing this with me it is a totally
unofficial gift which indicates the
feeling of the American people for what
China has meant to so many of them it is
not worth a great deal but it is a
symbol of the attitude with which all of
us will come on our journeys next year
to improve relations between our peoples
and to move from hostility to friendship
and quote and with a tentative though
not finalized draft of the communique in
hand both sides parted and
Kissinger's plane took off late in the
evening back to the US they would meet
again the following February Kissinger
flew back to the States and Joe went
back to mopping up the aftermath of the
Lin Biao incident the evening before the
UN General Assembly had voted 76 to 33
with 17 abstentions to seek the People's
Republic of China as the legitimate
government of China Taiwan was out and
believe me when I say that that was a
black day on the island of Formosa the
UN ambassador at the time was George
Bush 41 and he had given his private
assurances to the Taiwanese that what
happened would not happen but there's no
change in the tide of history to say
there was a conservative backlash as
another huge understatement it was led
by none other than Ronald Reagan and
other conservative luminaries such as
William F Buckley Jr Barry Goldwater and
New York Senator James Buckley amidst
all this as if there weren't enough
setbacks and tensions and national
melodrama going on November 1971
Pakistan and India got into a war with
Russia backing India and China of course
back in Pakistan there was still plenty
of time left on the clock for some
international crisis or crises to
scuttle this whole initiative the early
1970s and wasn't such a peaceful time on
earth besides the Vietnam War India
Pakistan
Wars there was also the first Eritrean
civil war the Bangladesh insurgency the
Yom Kippur War 1973 and the dirty war
going on down in Mexico not much peace
in the world nor goodwill towards men
and women it's not like there was
nothing else going on besides us-china
normalization of relations as the days
and weeks ticked by while that remain
was for Nixon to actually carry out the
presidential visit but before that could
happen what Kissinger and Joe could not
finalize back in October still had to be
finalized as he said he would
Kissinger sent general Alexander Haig to
China now Haig was the presidential
assistant for national security affairs
which made him when a Kissinger is gang
he went over to China on January 3rd
1972 and stayed till the 10th basically
working with Joe's people to lay the
groundwork for the presidential visit
and handle all those tasks that
diplomats do to make sure that when the
actual important moment arrived ie when
Nixon was sitting with my or with Joe
that there were no surprises and or
possibility of any potential
embarrassment so general Haig went there
and he met with Joe and ly cheap hyung
Fay and others and they discussed of
course the major topics of the Vietnam
War the India Pakistani conflict that
was still raging and of course the big
one
Taiwan mind you Chairman Mao might not
have been involved with any of these
foreign diplomats coming and going but
he was briefed constantly by Joe or by
others and knew every single detail of
every single discussion these
discussions between general Haig and Joe
Xiao Quan hua chief Hong Fei were very
frank to say the least on the subject of
Vietnam Joe pulled no punches and
downright called America's involvement
in Vietnam a mistake and he further said
the whole world know it therefore there
was no honorable face-saving way for
America to extricate itself and they
went back and forth on all the
shoes until both sides had said all they
wanted to say and although there was
still plenty they disagreed on they
managed to come together on some things
or at worst were clearly aware of each
other's stand on all the major issues it
was tedious and very high-pressure and
all this time the Cultural Revolution
was still going on and even after
lianbao was gone these radicals down in
shanghai hadn't given up trying to
scuttle the whole process and one other
thing about this visit of Al Haig in
January 1972 he had to put up with a lot
of leftist anti-american BS from these
elites who surrounded junk Ching sparks
were flying in Shanghai between Hague
and his anti-american tormentors
constantly trying to bait him and make
his stay uncomfortable Joe even had to
get mao involved to talk to his wife and
to put a lid on these anti-american
imperialist hotheads who were giving
general Hague a lot of heat at every
turn after almost three years of
painstaking back-and-forth negotiation
with setback after breakthrough now it
was finally about to happen general Haig
and his team got the job done and
everything was ready to go then on
February 17 1972 Nixon and the first
lady Pat Nixon his wife for 32 years at
the time they took a helicopter to
Andrews where they boarded Air Force One
for the flight to Hawaii where they
would spend the first couple days on the
20th they flew to Guam staying overnight
and then the great moment happened 11:30
a.m. in Beijing 10:30 at night on the US
East Coast 7:30 in Los Angeles the
perfect time and believe me they planned
it that way February 21st 1972 Air Force
one landed at beijing capital airport
there had been no official relations
between China and the US for 23 years
and that was about to end in a moment
Joanne Lai the premier of China was
there to personally greet the president
he waited at the bottom of the stairs of
Air Force One Nixon famously had the
Secret Service block the exit so that he
alone with wife Pat of course could walk
down the steps to the assembled
International TV press corps and make
this historic handshake with premier Joe
and lie the photo with Mao of course of
Nixon on the great wall now there were
many great shots that some of us will
always remember but the money shot the
one that more than any other defined
this moment in history when you go to
the Nixon Library in Yorba Linda
California not far from where I live
that moment was immortalized in a statue
of the two men the President of the
United States and the premier of China
both hands extended in friendship
they had a long handshake with Nixon
extending his hand first as he walked
the final steps towards Joe and ly in
this brief moment Shirley put the ghost
to rest of Dulles a snub to Joe 18 years
before at the Geneva Conference only
after the presidential handshake could
Kissinger and everyone else on Air Force
One
make their way out of the plane and bask
in whatever glory Nixon had afforded
them and let me just also mention in
that famous photo with the president and
the premier you'll see standing next to
Joe to his right was a man named Cheech
altru who just recently passed away and
April this year age and ID he had quite
an extraordinary life and served as the
interpreter to both MA and Joe so he
shows up in a lot of photos so President
Richard Milhous Nixon enjoy this moment
of political ecstasy that was covered by
the entire international press the US
journalists alone numbered around 85 and
most of these were TV reporters and crew
altogether
Joe's welcoming committee consisted of
about 25 officials of various high rank
there were no crowds to meet Nixon and
lend an air of mass popular support and
enthusiasm
it was a controlled moment but Nixon
indeed at that moment was being watched
around the world and he had to have
thought at that moment that his
re-election in November 1972 was assured
after 15 minutes of that stuff they all
got into their cars and headed into the
city to start the trip Joe had said to
Nixon and the limo ride quote your
handshake came over the vastest ocean in
the world twenty-five years of no
communication and quote and let's just
abruptly end things right here I'll
leave you hanging in suspense for just a
little while longer but rest assured the
electrifying conclusion of this series
will be coming sooner than you think
thanks to everyone who's made it this
far this is a special 10-year
anniversary program of the China history
podcast brought to you by our sponsor
who for now is basically yours truly
Laszlo Montgomery I'll be waiting for
you next time rest assured same bat-time
same bat-channel for another exciting
episode of the china history podcast